# problem solving: getting unstuck

some article notes


## step 1: don't run

sit down with the problem

focus on it

don't turn away from it; don't seek distractions like email, social media, or
other "interesting" problems to solve instead

experience, without judgment, the feelings that come up while facing it


## step 2: override cognitive shock

imagining where you think you *should* be by now is poisonous and induces
anxiety. very hard place to be if you're stuck on a problem that you're solving
for e.g. work or on a deadline

feelings of anxiety or dread or worry induce "cognitive shock", where the
thinking part of our brain shuts down and the primitive responses of fight,
flight, or go numb take over. it might feel like you can't think, are confused,
or in a fog

this is kind of cool because you can empirically verify it quite easily: ask
yourself to solve a math problem, like 7 * 35, and watch your mind grapple with
it. if I'm in a state of cognitive shock, I'll fumble over the numbers like
they're slick and wet, unable to work the math in my head or get started. I take
a few breaths, acknowledge that I'm stuck in cognitive shock and have powerful
emotions going on, and after several seconds (or minutes) I find that the
solution is workable and comes easily. trying to force yourself to do problem
solving when you're in cognitive shock is a sure-fire way to feel worse about
yourself: you're struggling to do even basic thinking and can't!

stay in the present. when your mind wanders and you catch it, reel it back to
the feelings in the body of the present moment. label the feelings as you
recognize them; this helps to recognize them and grasp that they're just
feelings and not reality, helping the thinking brain come back online


## step 3: step forward

determine how to take a step forward

- http://www.jeffwofford.com/?p=838
- http://programmer.97things.oreilly.com/wiki/index.php/Don%27t_Stay_Stuck

I like to sometimes talk to the problem, aloud if possible (see [rubber
ducking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rubber_duck_debugging)), to help me
process and understanding what the problem really is, and to figure out how to
make a single meaningful stride forward

